README.md, before:

[![A word cloud of translations of the word fediverse into multiple languages: fediverse, فدیورس, الفديفيرس, федивърса, Fedivers, Fediverse, 联邦宇宙, 聯邦宇宙, fediverso, federujo, fedibertsoa, fédivers, fediversum, fediwersum, fediversumi.](public/wordcloud/light/rectangle/fediverse.png)](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/tree/main/public/wordcloud)

# JoinTheFediverse.net

Learn about the fediverse and find your new community.

## Contributing

This project is run by volunteers and we appreciate all help. Here's how you can contribute.

### Suggesting new features or fediverse platforms to include

All included fediverse platforms should have a dedicated page on [joinfediverse.wiki](https://joinfediverse.wiki/) (not affiliated with this project).

Feel free to [open a new issue on this repo](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/issues/new/choose), or [reach out privately](https://stefanbohacek.com/contact/).


### Translation

Before you begin translating the site:

- See [which languages are already available](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/tree/main/translations) (see also the [About page](https://jointhefediverse.net/about)).
- Check if someone is [already working on a translation into your language](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+sort%3Aupdated-desc+label%3Atranslation).
- If there is an open ticket with your language, feel free to leave a comment if you'd like to join in.
- You can [open a new issue](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/issues/new?assignees=&labels=translation&projects=&template=translation.md&title=Translation%3A+LANGUAGE+NAME+%28language-code%29) titled `Translation: LANGUAGE NAME (language code)` (Here's a [helpful list of language codes](https://www.andiamo.co.uk/resources/iso-language-codes/ ).), or [reach out privately](https://stefanbohacek.com/contact/) and a ticket to track your work will be created for you.

The current translation workflow is described below. If you don't have a GitHub account, or prefer not to use it, feel free to follow steps 1 through 4 and send the translated files [via email](https://stefanbohacek.com/contact/).

Otherwise, you can [fork this repo](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/fork-a-repo), make the necessary changes, and open a pull request.

1. Note the [language code](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/datacap/9.1.8?topic=support-supported-language-codes) for the language you'd like to translate. This will be your "locale".
2. Navigate to the `translations` folder.
3. Make a copy of the `en-us` folder and rename it to match your locale, in lower case.
4. Update the `.json` files inside the new folder.

The `[locale].json` file should have the following format:

```js
{
    "label": "Native name of the language",
    "label_lat": "latinized native name of the language, this is used for sorting",
    "label_en": "English name of the language",
    "lang_dir": "the direction of the languaue, LTR (left-to-right) or RTL (right-to-left)",
    "available": true, // Should the language be visible in the language picker? true or false
    "translators": [ // List of people who contributed to the translation
        {
            "name": "Person A",
            "url": "https://example.social/@person_a"
        },
        {
            "name": "Person B",
            "url": "https://example.social/@person_b"
        }
    ]
}
```

Please note that `label_lat` should be a latinized (or transliterated) version of the English name of the language. This is needed for a more natural alphabetical sorting in the language picker menu. For example, for Spanish:

```json
"label": "Español",
"label_lat": "espanol",
"label_en": "Spanish",
```

5. Translate each file inside your locale folder.

If you're working with a local copy of the site, you will need to [install node](https://nodejs.org/en/download) and run `npm run translate` to compile  translation files inside the `locales` directory. These files are not committed to the repo and will be generated during site deployment. 

Keep in mind that the goal is to [communicate the same ideas to an audience in a different culture](https://localizejs.com/articles/what-is-the-difference-between-translation-and-localization/). For example, in this sentence:

> You're probably using Gmail. Or perhaps Outlook. Or Yahoo Mail.

Consider listing services that are popular in your particular country.

> Pravdepodobne používaš Gmail. Alebo Zoznam.sk. Možno Centrum.sk.

### Updating existing translations

If you'd like to suggest changes to existing translations, and you're comfortable using git/GitHub, you can open a pull request with edits to the [translated files for your particular language](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/tree/main/translations).

Otherwise, please [reach out with your suggestions](https://stefanbohacek.com/contact/).

### Development

This project uses node v22.16.0. Here's how you can run it locally:

```sh
#install dependencies
npm install

# generate translation files
npm run translate

# start development server
npm run dev
```

Note that there is an [open ticket](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/issues/13) to migrate the styles to SCSS, which will also require adding a build step.

Commit message:

Added note on comments in JSON files.

README.md, after:

[![A word cloud of translations of the word fediverse into multiple languages: fediverse, فدیورس, الفديفيرس, федивърса, Fedivers, Fediverse, 联邦宇宙, 聯邦宇宙, fediverso, federujo, fedibertsoa, fédivers, fediversum, fediwersum, fediversumi.](public/wordcloud/light/rectangle/fediverse.png)](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/tree/main/public/wordcloud)

# JoinTheFediverse.net

Learn about the fediverse and find your new community.

## Contributing

This project is run by volunteers and we appreciate all help. Here's how you can contribute.

### Suggesting new features or fediverse platforms to include

All included fediverse platforms should have a dedicated page on [joinfediverse.wiki](https://joinfediverse.wiki/) (not affiliated with this project).

Feel free to [open a new issue on this repo](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/issues/new/choose), or [reach out privately](https://stefanbohacek.com/contact/).


### Translation

Before you begin translating the site:

- See [which languages are already available](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/tree/main/translations) (see also the [About page](https://jointhefediverse.net/about)).
- Check if someone is [already working on a translation into your language](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+sort%3Aupdated-desc+label%3Atranslation).
- If there is an open ticket with your language, feel free to leave a comment if you'd like to join in.
- You can [open a new issue](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/issues/new?assignees=&labels=translation&projects=&template=translation.md&title=Translation%3A+LANGUAGE+NAME+%28language-code%29) titled `Translation: LANGUAGE NAME (language code)` (Here's a [helpful list of language codes](https://www.andiamo.co.uk/resources/iso-language-codes/ ).), or [reach out privately](https://stefanbohacek.com/contact/) and a ticket to track your work will be created for you.

The current translation workflow is described below. If you don't have a GitHub account, or prefer not to use it, feel free to follow steps 1 through 4 and send the translated files [via email](https://stefanbohacek.com/contact/).

Otherwise, you can [fork this repo](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/fork-a-repo), make the necessary changes, and open a pull request.

1. Note the [language code](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/datacap/9.1.8?topic=support-supported-language-codes) for the language you'd like to translate. This will be your "locale".
2. Navigate to the `translations` folder.
3. Make a copy of the `en-us` folder and rename it to match your locale, in lower case.
4. Update the `.json` files inside the new folder.

The `[locale].json` file should have the following format:

```js
{
    "label": "Native name of the language",
    "label_lat": "latinized native name of the language, this is used for sorting",
    "label_en": "English name of the language",
    "lang_dir": "the direction of the languaue, LTR (left-to-right) or RTL (right-to-left)",
    "available": true, // Should the language be visible in the language picker? true or false
    "translators": [ // List of people who contributed to the translation
        {
            "name": "Person A",
            "url": "https://example.social/@person_a"
        },
        {
            "name": "Person B",
            "url": "https://example.social/@person_b"
        }
    ]
}
```

Please note that `label_lat` should be a latinized (or transliterated) version of the English name of the language. This is needed for a more natural alphabetical sorting in the language picker menu. For example, for Spanish:

```json
"label": "Español",
"label_lat": "espanol",
"label_en": "Spanish",
```

Also, please note that `//` and the following text used in the example above should not be included in the translated JSON file, this is only used for explanation.

5. Translate each file inside your locale folder.

If you're working with a local copy of the site, you will need to [install node](https://nodejs.org/en/download) and run `npm run translate` to compile  translation files inside the `locales` directory. These files are not committed to the repo and will be generated during site deployment. 

Keep in mind that the goal is to [communicate the same ideas to an audience in a different culture](https://localizejs.com/articles/what-is-the-difference-between-translation-and-localization/). For example, in this sentence:

> You're probably using Gmail. Or perhaps Outlook. Or Yahoo Mail.

Consider listing services that are popular in your particular country.

> Pravdepodobne používaš Gmail. Alebo Zoznam.sk. Možno Centrum.sk.

### Updating existing translations

If you'd like to suggest changes to existing translations, and you're comfortable using git/GitHub, you can open a pull request with edits to the [translated files for your particular language](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/tree/main/translations).

Otherwise, please [reach out with your suggestions](https://stefanbohacek.com/contact/).

### Development

This project uses node v22.16.0. Here's how you can run it locally:

```sh
#install dependencies
npm install

# generate translation files
npm run translate

# start development server
npm run dev
```

Note that there is an [open ticket](https://github.com/jointhefediverse-net/jointhefediverse.net/issues/13) to migrate the styles to SCSS, which will also require adding a build step.
